Recommendation Engine Documentation

1. Approach/Methodology
The goal of this project is to build a simple recommendation engine that, given a job role, recommends the three closest roles based on the similarity of required skills. The approach follows these steps:

Data Preparation:
A dataset of job roles and their required skills was created. Each role is associated with a set of skills (e.g., "Data Scientist" → {"Python", "Statistics", "Machine Learning", "Data Visualization"}).

Skill Encoding:
The skills were converted into a binary matrix using MultiLabelBinarizer from scikit-learn.

This matrix represents the presence (1) or absence (0) of each skill for every role.

Similarity Calculation:
Cosine Similarity was used to compute the similarity between roles based on their skill vectors.

Cosine similarity measures the cosine of the angle between two vectors, providing a value between 0 and 1, where 1 indicates identical vectors.

Recommendation Function:
A function, get_top_recommendations_cosine, was implemented to:

Accept an input role and the number of recommendations (top_n).

Handle case-insensitive input and validate the role.

Compute similarity scores between the input role and all other roles.

Return the top N most similar roles based on similarity scores.

Testing:
The function was tested with various roles, including edge cases such as:

Invalid role inputs.

Different values of top_n.

2. Why Cosine Similarity?
Cosine similarity was chosen for the following reasons:

✅ Effectiveness for Binary Data:

The skills are represented as binary vectors (1 for presence, 0 for absence). Cosine similarity works well with such sparse, high-dimensional data.

✅ Focus on Skill Overlap:

It measures the orientation (angle) between vectors rather than their magnitude. This makes it ideal for comparing roles based on shared skills, regardless of the total number of skills.

✅ Interpretability:

The similarity scores range from 0 to 1, where 1 indicates identical skill sets and 0 indicates no overlap. This makes the results easy to understand.

✅ Widely Used in Recommendation Systems:

Cosine similarity is a standard technique in recommendation systems, text analysis, and information retrieval, making it a reliable choice for this task.

3. Example Output
For the input role "ML Engineer", the output might look like this:

python
Copy
Edit
Cosine Similarity scores for ML Engineer: {
    'Data Scientist': 0.75,
    'Data Analyst': 0.5,
    'Data Engineer': 0.5,
    'AI Researcher': 0.75,
    'Business Analyst': 0.0,
    'NLP Engineer': 0.75
}
Recommended roles:

python
Copy
Edit
[('AI Researcher', 0.75), ('Data Scientist', 0.75), ('NLP Engineer', 0.75)]
4. Conclusion
This recommendation engine provides a simple yet effective way to identify similar job roles based on shared skills. By leveraging cosine similarity and a binary skill representation, the system ensures accurate and interpretable recommendations.

Future Enhancements:

Assign weights to skills based on industry relevance.

Allow users to input a custom skill set and get recommended job roles.

Experiment with other similarity measures like Jaccard Similarity.

Develop a web-based UI for better accessibility.